I can suspend your adventure for you so you can resume later, but you will have to wait at least one minutes before continuing.
You scored two out of a possible three using four turns.
This adventure was suspended a mere five minutes ago.
To achieve the next higher rating, you need six more points.
There are seven threatening little dwarves in the room with you.
Invalid data section number: eight.
nine of them throw knives at you!
ten of them get you!
I can suspend your adventure for you so you can resume later, but you will have to wait at least eleven minutes before continuing.
You scored twelve out of a possible thirteen using fourteen turns.
This adventure was suspended a mere fifteen minutes ago.
To achieve the next higher rating, you need sixteen more points.
There are seventeen threatening little dwarves in the room with you.
Invalid data section number: eighteen.
nineteen of them throw knives at you!
twenty of them get you!
I can suspend your adventure for you so you can resume later, but you will have to wait at least thirty minutes before continuing.
You scored fourty out of a possible fifty using 60 turns.
This adventure was suspended a mere seventy minutes ago.
To achieve the next higher rating, you need eighty more points.
There are ninety threatening little dwarves in the room with you.
Invalid data section number: twenty three.
thirty seven of them throw knives at you!
fourty nine of them get you!
I can suspend your adventure for you so you can resume later, but you will have to wait at least fifty one minutes before continuing.
You scored sixty two out of a possible seventy four using eighty six turns.
This adventure was suspended a mere ninety eight minutes ago.
To achieve the next higher rating, you need twenty five more points.
There are thirty four threatening little dwarves in the room with you.
Invalid data section number: fourty two.
fifty seven of them throw knives at you!
sixty six of them get you!
Colossal cave is closed nine AM to five PM Monday through Friday except holidays.
Please tell jim@rand.org that fatal bug one happened.
I am prepared to give you a hint, but it will cost you two points.
If you were to quit now, you would score four out of a possible three.
Hash table overflow.
To achieve the next higher rating, you need one more point.
To achieve the next higher rating would be a neat trick!
Congratulations!!
You just went off my scale!!!
This adventure was suspended a mere one minute ago.
What would you like to call the saved version?
'With these rooms I might now have been familiarly acquainted.'
can't open file
I see no lamp here
I see no lantern here
I see no light here
I see no headlight here
I see no head lamp here
I see no rock here
I see no surface here
I see no battery here
I see no carpet here
I see no barrel here
I see no gold here
I see no gold nugget here
I see no diamond here
I see no silver here
I see no silver bars here
I see no jewel here
I see no coins here
I see no chest here
I see no box here
I see no treasure here
I see no eggs here
I see no egg here
I see no nest here
I see no trident here
I see no ming vase here
I see no vase here
I see no shards of pottery here
I see no pottery here
I see no emerald here
I see no platinum here
I see no vending machine here
I see no knife here
I see no pyramid here
I see no platinum pyramid here
I see no pearl here
I see no persian rug here
I see no rug here
I see no spices here
I see no chain here
I see no knives here
I see no food here
I see no rations here
I see no bottle here
I see no jar here
I see no water here
I see no oil here
I see no debris here
I see no shell here
I see no keys here
I see no key here
I see no grate here
I see no cage here
I see no pillow here
I see no velvet here
I see no tablet here
I see no magazine here
I see no issue here
I see no spelunker today here
I see no mirror here
I see no beanstalk here
I see no mist here
I see no lock here
I see no oyster here
I see no clam here
I see no bear here
I see no axe here
I see no troll here
I see no wand here
I see no rod here
I see no dragon here
I see no bird here
I see no pirate here
I see no dwarf here
I see no dwarves here
I see no snake here
I see no clam here
I see no oyster here
I see no plant here
I see no giant here
I see no shadow here
I see no figure here
I see no beanstalk here
say what?
chant what?
sing what?
utter what?
mumble what?
enter what?
return what?
jump what?
climb what?
retreat what?
retread what?
continue what?
walk what?
run what?
exit what?
leave what?
crawl what?
ascend what?
descend what?
cross what?
swim what?
travel what?
proceed what?
go what?
explore what?
follow what?
turn what?
unlock what?
open what?
lock what?
close what?
carry what?
pick up what?
take what?
keep what?
catch what?
steal what?
capture what?
get what?
tote what?
drop what?
release what?
free what?
discard what?
dump what?
throw what?
toss what?
find what?
rub what?
fill what?
shatter what?
break what?
read what?
peruse what?
dig what?
excavate what?
light what?
extinguish  what?
turn off what?
turn on what?
pour what?
eat what?
devour what?
drink what?
wave what?
shake what?
swing what?
attack what?
kill what?
slay what?
fight what?
hit what?
strike what?
smash what?
blast what?
detonate what?
ignite what?
blow up what?
feed what?
calm what?
placate what?
wake what?
disturb what?
user closed input stream, quitting.
Give me a break!!
Please answer the question.
rdesc called with bad section
Too many magic messages
Too many random message
You're at end of road again.
You're at hill in road.
You're inside building.
You're in valley.
You're in forest.
You're in forest.
You're at slit in stream bed.
You're outside grate.
You're below the grate.
You're in Cobble Crawl.
You're in Debris Room.
You're in Bird Chamber.
You're at top of small pit.
You're in Hall of Mists.
You're on east bank of fissure.
You're in Nugget of Gold Room.
You're in Hall of Mountain King.
You're at west end of Twopit Room.
You're in east pit.
You're in west pit.
You're at 'Y 2'.
You're at window on pit.
You're in dirty passage.
You're in Dusty Rock room.
You're at west end of Hall of Mists.
You're at brink of pit.
You're at east end of Long Hall.
You're at west end of Long Hall.
You're at Complex Junction.
You're in Swiss Cheese room.
You're at east end of Twopit Room.
You're in Slab Room.
You're at junction of three secret canyons.
You're in secret east west canyon above tight canyon.
You're in narrow corridor.
You're at steep incline above large room.
You're in Giant Room.
You're in cavern with waterfall.
You're in Soft Room.
You're in Oriental Room.
You're in Misty Cavern.
You're in Alcove.
You're in Plover Room.
You're in Dark-Room.
You're in Arched Hall.
You're in Shell Room.
You're in Anteroom.
You're at Witt's End.
You're in Mirror Canyon.
You're at window on pit.
You're at top of stalactite.
You're at Reservoir.
You're at north east end.
You're at south west end.
You're on south west side of chasm.
You're in sloping corridor.
You're on north east side of chasm.
You're in corridor.
You're at fork in path.
You're at junction with warm walls.
You're at Breath-taking View.
You're in Chamber of Boulders.
You're in limestone passage.
You're in front of barren room.
You're in Barren Room.
A large stalactite extends from the roof and almost reaches the floor below.  You could climb down it, and jump from it to the floor, but having done so you would be unable to reach it to climb back up.
At your feet all the water of the stream splashes into a 2-inch slit in the rock.  Downstream the stream bed is bare rock.
At your feet is a small pit breathing traces of white mist.  An east passage ends here except for a small crack leading on.
Dead end
Dead end crawl.
The canyon here becomes too tight to go further south.
The canyon runs into a mass of boulders. dead end.
The crack is far too small for you to follow.
The dome is unclimbable.
The passage here is blocked by a recent cave-in.
The path forks here.  The left fork leads northeast.  A dull rumbling seems to get louder in that direction.  The right fork leads southeast down a gentle slope.  The main corridor enters from the west.
There is nothing here to climb.  Use 'up' or 'out' to leave the pit.
The stream flows out through a pair of 1 foot diameter sewer pipes. It would be advisable to use the exit.
The walls are quite warm here.  From the north can be heard a steady roar, so loud that the entire cave seems to be trembling.  Another passage leads south, and a low crawl goes east.
This is a low room with a crude note on the wall.  The note says, 'You won't get it up the steps'.
This is the Oriental Room.  Ancient oriental cave drawings cover the walls.  A gently sloping passage leads upward to the north, another passage leads south east, and a hands and knees crawl leads west.
You are at a complex junction.  A low hands and knees passage from the north joins a higher crawl from the east to make a walking passage going west.  There is also a large room above.  The air is damp here.
You are at a crossover of a high north south passage and a low east west one.
You are at a wide place in a very tight north south canyon.
You are at one end of an immense north south passage.
You are at one end of a vast hall stretching forward out of sight to the west.  There are openings to either side.  Nearby, a wide stone staircase leads downward.  The hall is filled with wisps of white mist swaying to and fro almost as if alive.  A cold wind blows up the staircase.  There is a passage at the top of a dome behind you.
You are at the bottom of the eastern pit in the Twopit Room.  There is a small pool of oil in one corner of the pit.
You are at the bottom of the pit with a broken neck.
You are at the bottom of the western pit in the Twopit Room.  There is a large hole in the wall about 25 feet above you.
You are at the east end of a very long hall apparently without side chambers.  To the east a low wide crawl slants up.  To the north a round two foot hole slants down.
You are at the east end of the Twopit Room.  The floor here is littered with thin rock slabs, which make it easy to descend the pits. There is a path here bypassing the pits to connect passages from east and west.  There are holes all over, but the only big one is on the wall directly over the west pit where you can't get to it.
You are at the edge of a large underground reservoir.  An opaque cloud of white mist fills the room and rises rapidly upward.  The lake is fed by a stream, which tumbles out of a hole in the wall about 10 feet overhead and splashes noisily into the water somewhere within the mist.  The only passage goes back toward the south.
You are at the northeast end of an immense room, even larger than the Giant Room.  It appears to be a repository for the 'Adventure' program.  Massive torches far overhead bathe the room with smoky yellow light.  Scattered about you can be seen a pile of bottles (all of them empty), a nursery of young beanstalks murmuring quietly, a bed of oysters, a bundle of black rods with rusty stars on their ends, and a collection of brass lanterns.  Off to one side a great many dwarves are sleeping on the floor, snoring loudly.  A sign nearby reads: 'Do not disturb the dwarves!'  An immense mirror is hanging against one wall, and stretches to the other end of the room, where various other sundry objects can be glimpsed dimly in the distance.
You are at the southwest end of the Repository.  To one side is a pit full of fierce green snakes.  On the other side is a row of small wicker cages, each of which contains a little sulking bird.  In one corner is a bundle of black rods with rusty marks on their ends.  A large number of velvet pillows are scattered about on the floor.  A vast mirror stretches off to the northeast.  At your feet is a large steel grate, next to which is a sign which reads, 'Treasure Vault. Keys in Main Office.'
You are at the top of a steep incline above a large room.  You could climb down here, but you would not be able to climb up.  There is a passage leading back to the north.
You are at the west end of a very long featureless hall.  The hall joins up with a narrow north south passage.
You are at the west end of Hall of Mists.  A low wide crawl continues west and another goes north.  To the south is a little passage 6 feet off the floor.
You are at the west end of the Twopit Room.  There is a large hole in the wall above the pit at this end of the room.
You are at Witt's End.  Passages lead off in all directions.
You are crawling over cobbles in a low passage.  There is a dim light at the east end of the passage.
You are following a wide path around the outer edge of a large cavern. Far below, through a heavy white mist, strange splashing noises can be heard.  The mist rises up through a fissure in the ceiling.  The path exits to the south and west.
You are in a 20-foot depression floored with bare dirt.  Set into the dirt is a strong steel grate mounted in concrete.  A dry stream bed leads into the depression.
You are in a cul-de-sac about eight feet across.
You are in a debris room filled with stuff washed in from the surface. A low wide passage with cobbles becomes plugged with mud and debris here, but an awkward canyon leads upward and west.  A note on the wall says 'Magic word X Y Z Z Y'.
You are in a dirty broken passage.  To the east is a crawl.  To the west is a large passage.  Above you is a hole to another passage.
You are in a jumble of rock, with cracks everywhere.
You are in a large low circular chamber whose floor is an immense slab fallen from the ceiling (Slab Room).  East and west there once were large passages, but they are now filled with boulders.  Low small passages go north and south, and the south one quickly bends west around the boulders.
You are in a large low room.  Crawls lead north, south east, and south west.
You are in a large room full of dusty rocks.  There is a big hole in the floor.  There are cracks everywhere, and a passage leading east.
You are in a large room, with a passage to the south, a passage to the west, and a wall of broken rock to the east.  There is a large 'Y 2' on a rock in the room's center.
You are in a little maze of twisting passages, all different.
You are in a little maze of twisty passages, all different.
You are in a little twisty maze of passages, all different.
You are in a long, narrow corridor stretching out of sight to the west.  At the eastern end is a hole through which you can see a profusion of leaves.
You are in a long sloping corridor with ragged sharp walls.
You are in a long winding corridor sloping out of sight in both directions.
You are in a low north south passage at a hole in the floor.  The hole goes down to an east west passage.
You are in a magnificent cavern with a rushing stream, which cascades over a sparkling waterfall into a roaring whirlpool which disappears through a hole in the floor.  Passages exit to the south and west.
You are in a maze of little twisting passages, all different.
You are in a maze of little twisty passages, all different.
You are in a maze of twisting little passages, all different.
You are in a maze of twisty little passages, all alike.
You are in a maze of twisty little passages, all different.
You are in an alcove.  A small north west path seems to widen after a short distance.  An extremely tight tunnel leads east.  It looks like a very tight squeeze.  An eerie light can be seen at the other end.
You are in an anteroom leading to a large passage to the east.  Small passages go west and up.  The remnants of recent digging are evident. A sign in midair here says 'Cave under construction beyond this point. Proceed at own risk.  Witt construction company'
You are in an arched hall.  A coral passage once continued up and east from here, but is now blocked by debris.  The air smells of sea water.
You are in an awkward sloping east west canyon.
You are in a north south canyon about 25 feet across.  The floor is covered by white mist seeping in from the north.  The walls extend upward for well over 100 feet.  Suspended from some unseen point far above you, an enormous two-sided mirror is hanging parallel to and midway between the canyon walls.  (The mirror is obviously provided for the use of the dwarves, who as you know, are extremely vain.)  A small window can be seen in either wall, some fifty feet up.
You are in a room whose walls resemble Swiss cheese.  Obvious passages go west, east, north east, and north west.  Part of the room is occupied by a large bedrock block.
You are in a secret canyon at a junction of three canyons, bearing north, south, and south east.  The north one is as tall as the other two combined.
You are in a secret canyon which exits to the north and east.
You are in a secret canyon which here runs east west.  It crosses over a very tight canyon 15 feet below.  If you go down you may not be able to get back up.
You are in a secret north south canyon above a large room.
You are in a secret north south canyon above a sizable passage.
You are in a small chamber beneath a 3 by 3 steel grate to the surface. A low crawl over cobbles leads inward to the west.
You are in a small chamber filled with large boulders.  The walls are very warm, causing the air in the room to be almost stifling from the heat.  The only exit is a crawl heading west, through which is coming a low rumbling.
You are in a splendid chamber thirty feet high.  The walls are frozen rivers of orange stone.  An awkward canyon and a good passage exit from east and west sides of the chamber.
You are in a tall east west canyon.  A low tight crawl goes 3 feet north and seems to open up.
You are in a twisting little maze of passages, all different.
You are in a twisting maze of little passages, all different.
You are in a twisty little maze of passages, all different.
You are in a twisty maze of little passages, all different.
You are in a valley in the forest beside a stream tumbling along a rocky bed.
You are in Bedquilt, a long east west passage with holes everywhere. To explore at random select north, south, up, or down.
You are in open forest near both a valley and a road.
You are in open forest, with a deep valley to one side.
You are inside a barren room.  The center of the room is completely empty except for some dust.  Marks in the dust lead away toward the far end of the room.  The only exit is the way you came in.
You are inside a building, a well house for a large spring.
You are in the bottom of a small pit with a little stream, which enters and exits through tiny slits.
You are in the Giant Room.  The ceiling here is too high up for your lamp to show it.  Cavernous passages lead east, north, and south.  On the west wall is scrawled the inscription, 'Fee fie foe foo'.
You are in the Hall of the Mountain King, with passages off in all directions.
You are in the Soft Room.  The walls are covered with heavy curtains, the floor with a thick pile carpet.  Moss covers the ceiling.
You are in the south side chamber.
You are in the west side chamber of the Hall of the Mountain King. A passage continues west and up here.
You are on one side of a large, deep chasm.  A heavy white mist rising up from below obscures all view of the far side.  A south west path leads away from the chasm into a winding corridor.
You are on the brink of a small clean climbable pit.  A crawl leads west.
You are on the brink of a thirty foot pit with a massive orange column down one wall.  You could climb down here but you could not get back up.  The maze continues at this level.
You are on the east bank of a fissure slicing clear across the hall. The mist is quite thick here, and the fissure is too wide to jump.
You are on the edge of a breath-taking view.  Far below you is an active volcano, from which great gouts of molten lava come surging out, cascading back down into the depths.
You are on the far side of the chasm.  A north east path leads away from the chasm on this side.
You are on the west side of the fissure in the Hall of Mists.
You are standing at the end of a road before a small brick building. Around you is a forest.  A small stream flows out of the building and down a gully.
You are standing at the entrance to a large, barren room.  A sign posted above the entrance reads:  'Caution!  Bear in room!'
You are walking along a gently sloping north south passage lined with oddly shaped limestone formations.
You can't get by the snake.
You clamber up the plant and scurry through the hole at the top.
You didn't make it.
You have climbed up the plant and out of the pit.
You have crawled through a very low wide passage parallel to and north of the Hall of Mists.
You have walked up a hill, still in the forest.  The road slopes back down the other side of the hill.  There is a building in the distance.
You're at a low window overlooking a huge pit, which extends up out of sight.  A floor is indistinctly visible over 50 feet below.  Traces of white mist cover the floor of the pit, becoming thicker to the left. Marks in the dust around the window would seem to indicate that someone has been here recently.  Directly across the pit from you and 25 feet away there is a similar window looking into a lighted room.  A shadowy figure can be seen there peering back at you.
You're at a low window overlooking a huge pit, which extends up out of sight.  A floor is indistinctly visible over 50 feet below.  Traces of white mist cover the floor of the pit, becoming thicker to the right. Marks in the dust around the window would seem to indicate that someone has been here recently.  Directly across the pit from you and 25 feet away there is a similar window looking into a lighted room.  A shadowy figure can be seen there peering back at you.
You're in a large room carved out of sedimentary rock.  The floor and walls are littered with bits of shells embedded in the stone.  A shallow passage proceeds downward, and a somewhat steeper one leads up.  A low hands and knees passage enters from the south.
You're in a long east west corridor.  A faint rumbling noise can be heard in the distance.
You're in a small chamber lit by an eerie green light.  An extremely narrow tunnel exits to the west.  A dark corridor leads north east.
You're in the Dark-Room.  A corridor leading south is the only exit.
A glistening pearl falls out of the clam and rolls away.  Goodness, this must really be an oyster.  (I never was very good at identifying bivalves.)  Whatever it is, it has now snapped shut again.
A hollow voice says 'Plugh'.
A little dwarf just walked around a corner, saw you, threw a little axe at you (which missed), cursed, and ran away.
A little dwarf with a big knife blocks your way.
All right.  But don't blame me if something goes wrong. Poof! You are engulfed in a cloud of orange smoke.  Coughing and gasping, you emerge from the smoke and find.
A mysterious recorded voice groans into life and announces: 'This exit is closed.  Please leave via Main Office.'
Are you trying to catch the bird?
Are you trying to explore beyond the Plover Room?
Are you trying to get into the cave?
Are you trying to somehow deal with the snake?
A sepulchral voice reverberating through the cave, says, 'Cave closing soon.  All adventurers exit immediately through Main Office.'
Attacking the snake both doesn't work and is very dangerous.
Blasting requires dynamite.
'Congratulations on bringing light into the Dark-Room!'
Digging without a shovel is quite impractical.  Even with a shovel progress is unlikely.
Don't be ridiculous!
Don't go west.
Do you indeed wish to quit now?
Do you need help getting out of here?
Do you need help getting out of the maze?
Do you really want to quit now?
Do you want the hint?
For crying out loud, the poor thing is already dead!
Gluttony is not one of the troll's vices.  Avarice, however, is.
Good try, but that is an old worn-out magic word.
Hmmm, this looks like a clue, which means it'll cost you 10 points to read it.  Should I go ahead and read it anyway?
I advise you to put down the clam before opening it.  strain!
I advise you to put down the oyster before opening it.  wrench!
I am unsure how you are facing.  Use compass points or nearby objects.
I believe what you want is right here with you.
I can only tell you what you see as you move about and manipulate things.  I cannot tell you where remote things are.
I dare say whatever you want is around here somewhere.
I don't know how.
I don't know how to apply that word here.
I don't know how to lock or unlock such a thing.
I don't know in from out here.  Use compass points or name something in the general direction you want to go.
I don't know that word.
I don't know the word 'stop'.  Use 'quit' if you want to give up.
I don't know where the cave is, but hereabouts no stream can run on the surface for long.  I would try the stream.
I don't understand that!
If you prefer, simply type w rather than west.
If you want to end your adventure early, say 'quit'.  To suspend your adventure such that you can continue later, say 'suspend' (or 'pause' or 'save').  To see what hours the cave is normally open, say 'hours'. To see how well you're doing, say 'score'.  To get full credit for a treasure, you must have left it safely in the building, though you get partial credit just for locating it.  You lose points for getting killed, or for quitting, though the former costs you more.  There are also points based on how much (if any) of the cave you've managed to explore; in particular, there is a large bonus just for getting in (to distinguish the beginners from the rest of the pack), and there are other ways to determine whether you've been through some of the more harrowing sections.  If you think you've found all the treasures, just keep exploring for a while.  If nothing interesting happens, you haven't found them all yet.  If something interesting does happen, it means you're getting a bonus and have an opportunity to garner many more points in the Master's Section.  I may occasionally offer hints if you seem to be having trouble.  If I do, I'll warn you in advance how much it will affect your score to accept the hints.  Finally, to save paper, you may specify 'brief', which tells me never to repeat the full description of a place unless you explicitly ask me to.
I know of places, actions, and things.  Most of my vocabulary describes places and is used to move you there.
I'm afraid I don't understand.
I'm afraid the magazine is written in Dwarvish.
I'm as confused as you are.
I'm game.  Would you care to explain how?
I need more detailed instructions to do that.
I respectfully suggest you go across the bridge instead of jumping.
Is this acceptable?
It gets you!
It has no lock.
I think I just lost my appetite.
It is beyond your power to do that.
It is now pitch dark.  If you proceed you will likely fall into a pit.
It is too far up for you to reach.
It looks as though you're dead.  Well, seeing as how it's so close to closing time anyway, I think we'll just call it a day.
It misses!
It says, 'there is something strange about this place, such that one of the words I've always known now has a new effect.'
It says the same thing it did before.
It's not hungry (it's merely pinin' for the fjords).  Besides, you have no bird seed.
It was already locked.
It was already unlocked.
Just as you reach the other side, the bridge buckles beneath the weight of the bear, which was still following you around.  You scrabble desperately for support, but as the bridge collapses you stumble back and fall into the chasm.
Messages 81 thru 90 are reserved for 'obituaries'.
Mist is a white vapor, usually water, seen from time to time in caverns.  It can be found anywhere but is frequently a sign of a deep pit leading down to water.
None of them hit you!
Nothing happens.
Now you've really done it!  I'm out of orange smoke!  You don't expect me to do a decent reincarnation without any orange smoke, do you?
Oh dear, you seem to have gotten yourself killed.  I might be able to help you out, but I've never really done this before.  Do you want me to try to reincarnate you?
Oh, leave the poor unhappy bird alone.
OK
Okay, from now on I'll only describe a place in full the first time you come to it.  To get the full description, say 'look'.
Okay, if you're so smart, do it yourself!  I'm leaving!
Okay, now where did I put my orange smoke?  poof! Everything disappears in a dense cloud of orange smoke.
One of them gets you!
One sharp nasty knife is thrown at you!
On what?
Out from the shadows behind you pounces a bearded pirate!  'Har, har,' he chortles, 'I'll just take all this booty and hide it away with me chest deep in the maze!'  He snatches your treasure and vanishes into the gloom.
Peculiar.  Nothing unexpected happens.
Rubbing the electric lamp is not particularly rewarding.  Anyway, nothing exciting happens.
Something you're carrying won't fit through the tunnel with you. You'd best take inventory and drop something.
Somewhere nearby is Colossal Cave, where others have found fortunes in treasure and gold, though it is rumored that some who enter are never seen again.  Magic is said to work in the cave.  I will be your eyes and hands.  Direct me with commands.  Should you get stuck, say 'help' for some general hints.  For information on how to end your adventure, etc., say 'info'. This program was originally developed by Will Crowther.  Most of the features of the current program were added by Don Woods.  Address complaints about the UNIX version to Jim Gillogly (jim@rand.org).
Sorry, but I am not allowed to give more detail.  I will repeat the long description of your location.
Sorry, but I no longer seem to remember how it was you got here.
Thank you, it was delicious!
The axe bounces harmlessly off the dragon's thick scales.
The axe misses and lands near the bear where you can't get at it.
The bear eagerly wolfs down your food, after which he seems to calm down considerably and even becomes rather friendly.
The bear is confused; he only wants to be your friend.
The bear is still chained to the wall.
The bear lumbers toward the troll, who lets out a startled shriek and scurries away.  The bear soon gives up the pursuit and wanders back.
The bird is frightened right now and you cannot catch it no matter what you try.  Perhaps you might try later.
The bird was unafraid when you entered, but as you approach it becomes disturbed and you cannot catch it.
The bottle of water is now empty.
The chain is now locked.
The chain is now unlocked.
The chain is still locked.
The door is extremely rusty and refuses to open.
The dragon looks rather nasty.  You'd best not try to get by.
The dwarves' knives vanish as they strike the walls of the cave.
The grate is now locked.
The grate is now unlocked.
The grate is very solid and has a hardened steel lock.  You cannot enter without a key, and there are no keys nearby.  I would recommend looking elsewhere for the keys.
The hinges are quite thoroughly rusted now and won't budge.
The little bird attacks the green dragon, and in an astounding flurry gets burnt to a cinder.  The ashes blow away.
The little bird attacks the green snake, and in an astounding flurry drives the snake away.
The little bird is now dead.  Its body disappears.
The oil has freed up the hinges so that the door will now move, although it requires some effort.
The oyster creaks open, revealing nothing but oyster inside.  It promptly snaps shut again.
The plant has exceptionally deep roots and cannot be pulled free.
The plant indignantly shakes the oil off its leaves and asks, 'water?'
There are faint rustling noises from the darkness behind you.
There are faint rustling noises from the darkness behind you.  As you turn toward them, the beam of your lamp falls across a bearded pirate. He is carrying a large chest.  'Shiver me timbers!' he cries, 'I've been spotted!  I'd best hie meself off to the maze to hide me chest!' With that, he vanishes into the gloom.
There is a loud explosion, and a twenty-foot hole appears in the far wall, burying the dwarves in the rubble.  You march through the hole and find yourself in the Main Office, where a cheering band of friendly elves carry the conquering adventurer off into the sunset.
There is a loud explosion, and a twenty-foot hole appears in the far wall, burying the snakes in the rubble.  A river of molten lava pours in through the hole, destroying everything in its path, including you!
There is a loud explosion, and you are suddenly splashed across the walls of the room.
There is a threatening little dwarf in the room with you!
There is a way to explore that region without having to worry about falling into a pit.  None of the objects available is immediately useful in discovering the secret.
There is no longer any way across the chasm.
There is nothing here to attack.
There is nothing here to eat.
There is nothing here to which the chain can be locked.
There is nothing here with a lock!
There is nothing here with which to fill the bottle.
There is nothing here with which to fill the vase.
There is no way across the fissure.
There is no way to get past the bear to unlock the chain, which is probably just as well.
There is no way to go that direction.
There's no point in suspending a demonstration game.
There's nothing here it wants to eat (except perhaps you).
There's not much point in wandering around out here, and you can't explore the cave without a lamp.  So let's just call it a day.
The resulting ruckus has awakened the dwarves.  There are now several threatening little dwarves in the room with you!  Most of them throw knives at you!  All of them get you!
The sepulchral voice intones, 'The cave is now closed.'  As the echoes fade, there is a blinding flash of light (and a small puff of orange smoke).    As your eyes refocus, you look around and find .
The shell is very strong and is impervious to attack.
The snake has now devoured your bird.
The sudden change in temperature has delicately shattered the vase.
The trees of the forest are large hardwood oak and maple, with an occasional grove of pine or spruce.  There is quite a bit of under- growth, largely birch and ash saplings plus nondescript bushes of various sorts.  This time of year visibility is quite restricted by all the leaves, but travel is quite easy if you detour around the spruce and berry bushes.
The troll catches your treasure and scurries away out of sight.
The troll deftly catches the axe, examines it carefully, and tosses it back, declaring, 'Good workmanship, but it's not valuable enough.'
The troll refuses to let you cross.
'This is not the maze where the pirate leaves his treasure chest.'
Trolls are close relatives with the rocks and have skin as tough as that of a rhinoceros.  The troll fends off your blows effortlessly.
Watch it!
Welcome to Adventure!!  Would you like instructions?
What?
What's the matter, can't you read?  Now you'd best start over.
Where?
Which way?
With what?  Your bare hands?
With what?  Your bare hands?  Against his bear hands??
You are already carrying it!
You are being followed by a very large, tame bear.
You are currently holding the following:
You aren't carrying it!
You attack a little dwarf, but he dodges out of the way.
You awaken only to discover your bits have been dissolving while you slept.  You disappear in a cloud of greasy black smoke.
You can catch the bird, but you cannot carry it.
You can make the passages look less alike by dropping things.
You can't be serious!
You can't carry anything more.  You'll have to drop something first.
You can't fill that.
You can't fit this five-foot clam through that little passage!
You can't fit this five-foot oyster through that little passage!
You can't get there from here.
You can't go through a locked steel grate!
You can't kill the snake, or drive it away, or avoid it, or anything like that.  There is a way to get by, but you don't have the necessary resources right now.
You can't pour that.
You can't unlock the keys.
You clumsy oaf, you've done it again!  I don't know how long I can keep this up.  Do you want me to try reincarnating you again?
You don't fit through a two-inch slit!
You don't have anything strong enough to open the clam.
You don't have anything strong enough to open the oyster.
You fell into a pit and broke every bone in your body!
You fool, dwarves eat only coal!  Now you've made him really mad!!
You have crawled around in some little holes and found your way blocked by a recent cave-in.  You are now back in the main passage.
You have crawled around in some little holes and wound up back in the main passage.
You have no keys!
You have no source of light.
You have nothing in which to carry it.
You have taken a drink from the stream.  The water tastes strongly of minerals, but is not unpleasant.  It is extremely cold.
You have taken the vase and hurled it delicately to the ground.
You killed a little dwarf.
You killed a little dwarf.  The body vanishes in a cloud of greasy black smoke.
You prod the nearest dwarf, who wakes up grumpily, takes one look at you, curses, and grabs for his axe.
Your bottle is already full.
Your bottle is empty and the ground is wet.
Your bottle is now full of oil.
Your bottle is now full of water.
You're not carrying anything.
Your feet are now wet.
Your lamp has run out of power.
Your lamp is getting dim, and you're out of spare batteries.  You'd best start wrapping this up.
Your lamp is getting dim.  I'm taking the liberty of replacing the batteries.
Your lamp is getting dim.  You'd best go back for those batteries.
Your lamp is getting dim.  You'd best start wrapping this up, unless You can find some fresh batteries.  I seem to recall there's a vending machine in the maze.  Bring some coins with you.
Your lamp is now off.
Your lamp is now on.
You strike the mirror a resounding blow, whereupon it shatters into a myriad tiny fragments.
A large cloud of green smoke appears in front of you.  It clears away to reveal a tall wizard, clothed in grey.  He fixes you with a steely glare and declares, 'This adventure has lasted too long.'  With that he makes a single pass over you with his hands, and everything around you fades away into a grey nothingness.
Are you a wizard?
Be sure to save your core-image.
Break out of this and save your core-image.
Colossal Cave is open to regular adventurers at the following hours:
Do you wish to change the hours?
Do you wish to change the message of the day?
Do you wish to (re)schedule the next holiday?
Do you wish to see the hours?
Even wizards have to wait longer than that!
Foo, you are nothing but a charlatan!
I'm terribly sorry, but Colossal Cave is closed.  Our hours are:
I suggest you resume your adventure at a later time.
Limit lines to 70 chars.  End with null line.
Line too long, retype:
New hours for Colossal Cave:
New hours specified by defining 'prime time'.  Give only the hour.  Enter a negative number after last pair.
New magic number (null to leave unchanged):
New magic word (null to leave unchanged):
Not enough room for another line.  Ending message here.
Oh dear, you really are a wizard!  Sorry to have bothered you . . .
Okay.  You can save this version now.
Only a wizard may continue an adventure this soon.
Only wizards are permitted within the cave right now.
Prove it!  Say the magic word!
That is not what I thought it was.  Do you know what I thought it was?
To be called what (up to 20 characters)?
To begin how many days from today?
To last how many days (zero if no holiday)?
Too small!  Assuming minimum value (45 minutes).
Very well.
We do allow visitors to make short explorations during our off hours. Would you like to do that?
You are obviously a rank amateur.  Better luck next time.
Your score qualifies you as a Novice class Adventurer.
You have achieved the rating: 'Experienced Adventurer'.
You may now consider yourself a 'Seasoned Adventurer'.
You have reached 'Junior Master' status.
Your score puts you in Master Adventurer Class C.
Your score puts you in Master Adventurer Class B.
Your score puts you in Master Adventurer Class A.
All of Adventuredom gives tribute to you, Adventurer Grandmaster!
A burly troll stands by the bridge and insists you throw him a treasure before you may cross.
A cheerful little bird is sitting here singing.
A crystal bridge now spans the fissure.
A huge green fierce dragon bars the way!
A huge green fierce snake bars the way!
A massive stone tablet embedded in the wall reads: 'Congratulations on bringing light into the Dark-Room!'
A rickety wooden bridge extends across the chasm, vanishing into the mist.  A sign posted on the bridge reads, 'Stop! Pay troll!'
A small velvet pillow lies on the floor.
A three foot black rod with a rusty mark on an end lies nearby.
Bars of silver
Batteries
Brass lantern
Congratulations!  You have just vanquished a dragon with your bare hands!  (Unbelievable, isn't it?)
Done!
'Drop coins here to receive fresh batteries.'
Dwarf's axe
Egg-sized emerald
Giant clam grunt!
Giant oyster groan!
Glistening pearl
Golden chain
Golden eggs
Interesting.  There seems to be something written on the underside of the oyster.
Jeweled trident
Large gold nugget
Little bird in cage
Ming vase
Off to one side lies a glistening pearl!
Oil in the bottle
Persian rug
Platinum pyramid
Precious jewelry
Rare coins
Rare spices
Rough stone steps lead down the pit.
Rough stone steps lead up the dome.
Set of keys
Several diamonds
Small bottle
Some worn-out batteries have been discarded nearby.
'Spelunker Today'
Tasty food
The bear is locked to the wall with a golden chain!
The body of a huge green dead dragon is lying off to one side.
The crystal bridge has vanished!
The dragon is sprawled out on a Persian rug!!
The floor is littered with worthless shards of pottery.
The grate is locked.
The grate is open.
The Ming vase drops with a delicate crash.
The nest of golden eggs has vanished!
The pirate's treasure chest is here!
The plant grows explosively, almost filling the bottom of the pit.
The plant spurts into furious growth for a few seconds.
There are a few recent issues of 'Spelunker Today' magazine here.
There are bars of silver here!
There are diamonds here!
There are fresh batteries here.
There are many coins here!
There are rare spices here!
There are some keys on the ground here.
There is a 12-foot-tall beanstalk stretching up out of the pit, bellowing 'WATER!! WATER!!'
There is a bottle of oil here.
There is a bottle of water here.
There is a contented-looking bear wandering about nearby.
There is a delicate, precious, Ming vase here!
There is a ferocious cave bear eying you from the far end of the room!
There is a gentle cave bear sitting placidly in one corner.
There is a gigantic beanstalk stretching all the way up to the hole.
There is a golden chain locked to the wall!
There is a golden chain lying in a heap on the floor!
There is a huge beanstalk growing out of the west pit up to the hole.
There is a jewel-encrusted trident here!
There is a lamp shining nearby.
There is a large nest here, full of golden eggs!
There is a large sparkling nugget of gold here!
There is a little axe here.
There is a little axe lying beside the bear.
There is a little bird in the cage.
There is a massive vending machine here.  The instructions on it read:
There is a message scrawled in the dust in a flowery script, reading: 'This is not the maze where the pirate leaves his treasure chest.'
There is an emerald here the size of a plover's egg!
There is an empty bottle here.
There is an enormous clam here with its shell tightly closed.
There is an enormous oyster here with its shell tightly closed.
There is a Persian rug spread out on the floor!
There is a platinum pyramid here, 8 inches on a side!
There is a shiny brass lamp nearby.
There is a small wicker cage discarded nearby.
There is a tiny little plant in the pit, murmuring 'Water, water.'
There is food here.
There is precious jewelry here!
The shadowy figure seems to be trying to attract your attention.
The top of a 12-foot-tall beanstalk is poking out of the west pit.
The troll is nowhere to be seen.
The troll steps out from beneath the bridge and blocks your way.
The vase is now resting, delicately, on a velvet pillow.
The way north is barred by a massive, rusty, iron door.
The way north leads through a massive, rusty, iron door.
The wreckage of a bridge (and a dead bear) can be seen at the bottom of the chasm.
Treasure chest
Velvet pillow
Water in the bottle
Wicker cage
You've over-watered the plant!  It's shriveling up!  It's, it's.
tame what?
To move, try words like forest, building, downstream, enter, east, west, north, south, up, or down.
I know about a few special objects, like a black rod hidden in the cave.  These objects can be manipulated using some of the action words that I know.  Usually you will need to give both the object and action words (in either order), but sometimes I can infer the object from the verb alone.
Some objects also imply verbs; in particular, 'inventory' implies 'take inventory', which causes me to give you a list of what you're carrying.
The objects have side effects; for instance, the rod scares the bird.  Usually people having trouble moving just need to try a few more words.  Usually people trying unsuccessfully to manipulate an object are attempting something beyond their (or my!) capabilities and should try a completely different tack.
To speed the game you can sometimes move long distances with a simple command.  For example, 'go to the building' usually gets you to the building from anywhere above ground except when lost in the forest.
Also, note that cave passages turn a lot, and that leaving a room to the north does not guarantee entering the next from the south. Good luck!
The glowing rock fills the farthest reaches of the cavern with a blood-red glare, giving every thing an eerie, macabre appearance.
The air is filled with flickering sparks of ash and a heavy smell of brimstone.
The walls are hot to the touch, and the thundering of the volcano drowns out all other sounds.
Embedded in the jagged roof far overhead are myriad twisted formations composed of pure white alabaster, which scatter the murky light into sinister apparitions upon the walls.
To one side is a deep gorge, filled with a bizarre chaos of tortured rock which seems to have been crafted by the devil himself.
An immense river of fire crashes out from the depths of the volcano, burns its way through the gorge, and plummets into a bottomless pit far off to your left.
To the right, an immense geyser of blistering steam erupts continuously from a barren island in the center of a sulfurous lake, which bubbles ominously.
The far right wall is aflame with an incandescence of its own, which lends an additional infernal splendor to the already hellish scene.  A dark, foreboding passage exits to the south.
